In the previous video, we already learn about
what is vlan and why we need to use vlan.
Next in this video, we are going to practice
about vlan.
This is topology that we are going to use
to practice vlan.
I already configure the ip address of pc 1
pc 2 and pc 3, but not for pc 4.
Now let’s configure the ip address of pc 4,
so the ip address is 192.168.1.4.
Let’s make sure the ip address of pc 1, okay
the ip address is correct.
Pc 2 also correct, and pc 3 also correct.
Now let’s try to ping from pc 1 to pc 2, here
let’s go to simulation mode first.
And here let’s ping or send packet from
pc 1 to pc 2.
Here, pc 1 will send arp packet first.
Remember that arp packet is used to ask the
mac address of the destination.
In this case, pc 1 is ask for the mac address
of pc 2.
Here let’s continue.
The arp packet is received by switch.
And then the switch will be broadcast the
arp packet to all pc. But here we can see
that there is x in pc 3 and pc 4.
This is means that these 2 pc will not reply
for the arp packet.
Because the arp packet is to ask the mac address
of pc 2.
But here we can see that pc 2 will be reply.
And finally the arp packet is back to the
pc 1.
After the arp is complete like this, now pc 1
know the mac address of pc 2.
And then they will communicate with icmp protocol
Icmp protocol is the protocol that used in
ping.
Okay finally here we can see that the ping
is success.
What I want to show you is, that the arp packet
will be forwarded or broadcasted to all pc.
why?
This is because, by default, all of interface
in the switch is in the same vlan,
which is vlan 1.
Vlan 1 is the default vlan.
Because all interface is in the same vlan,
so the arp packet will be forwarded to all pc
Here let’s check it in the switch, to show
the vlan information,
we can use command show vlan brief.
Okay here we can see that all of interface
is in the same vlan, which is vlan 1.
This is why the arp packet will be forwarded
to all pc.
In the previous video, I already said that
one of the advantage if we use vlan is that
separation of broadcast domain.
Now let’s try it.
We will configure so pc 1 and pc 2 will be in
the vlan 10, and the pc 3 and pc 4 will be in
the vlan 20.
Actually you don’t need to use vlan number
10 and 20, the number of vlan is between 1-4095,
so you are free to use any number between
1 and 4095.
But in this example, I will use vlan 10 and
20.
Okay let’s start the configuration, open
the switch.
Always remember that if we want to doing any
configuration,
we need to enter global configuration mode first.
So here let’s type conf t or configure terminal.
Next let’s create the vlan, vlan 10, and
then let’s set the name of the vlan,
let’s say the name is accounting. Exit.
Now let’s verify it first, do show vlan
brief.
Okay here we can see that we have vlan 10
and the name is accounting.
Next let’s create for vlan 20.
And the name let’s say marketing. Exit.
Do show vlan brief again to verify.
Okay here we can see that now we have vlan
10 and vlan 20.
But if we see here, all of interface is still
in the vlan 1.
There is no interface in vlan 10 and vlan
20.
So now, we need to assign the interface to
the vlan.
Here fa0/2 and fa0/3 will be assign to vlan 10,
And then here fa0/1 and fa0/4 will be assign
to vlan 20.
Okay let’s start the configuration.
First let’s configure for fa0/2, interface
fa0/2, and then change the mode to access.
If you do not know about mode access, don’t
worry,
I will explain about this later in the next video.
Okay then let’s set the access vlan to 10.
This is means that we assign interface fa0/2
to vlan 10, and then exit.
Let’s verify, do show vlan brief.
Okay here we can see that now, fa0/2 is already
in the vlan 10.
Next let’s configure for fa0/3, this will
also assigned to vlan 10.
So go to interface fa0/3, switchport mode
access and then switchport access vlan 10. Exit.
Let’s verify again, okay here we can see
that now, fa0/2 and fa0/3 is in the vlan 10.
Next, let’s configure for vlan 20.
So here fa0/1 and fa0/4 will be assigned to
vlan 20.
Go to fa0/1, switchport mode access, switchport
access vlan 20, so here we assign fa0/1 to vlan 20.
Next let’s assign for fa0/4, here interface
fa0/4, switchport mode access, oh sorry there
is a typo, so switchport mode access, and
then switchport access vlan 20.
Now let’s verify it.
Do show vlan brief.
Okay here we can see that fa0/2 and fa0/3
is in the vlan 10,
and then fa0/1 and fa0/4 is in the vlan 20.
If we have done configuring vlan like this,
now we have 2 logical switch or virtual switch.
So here we have virtual switch for vlan 10,
and then we also have virtual switch for vlan 20
So physically, we have 1 switch.
But logically, we have 2 switch.
Which is switch for vlan 10 and switch for
vlan 20.
So now we have separation of broadcast domain.
This is mean, when pc1 send arp packet, the
arp packet will not forwarded to pc 3 and pc 4,
but only forwarded to pc 2. Let’s try it.
But before that, we need to remove the arp
table in all pc. ARP table is the mapping
of ip address and mac address, is the pc already
have arp table,
so the pc will not send an arp packet.
Okay here in the pc 1 still have arp table,
now let’s remove it.
Okay now the arp table is empty.
Pc 2, here we have arp table, let’s remove
it, okay now the arp table is empty.
Let’s check in the switch, in the switch
the name is not arp table,
but mac address table.
Okay here there is some entry in the mac address
table, let’s delete it.
Okay now the mac address table is empty.
now let’s send packet from pc 1 to pc 2.
Here we can see that pc 1 will send arp packet.
Continue, the arp packet will be forwarded
to switch, let’s check it, here we can see
that the arp packet will be forwarded only
to fa0/3,
which is the interface that connected to pc 2.
The arp packet will not forwarded to pc 3 and
pc 4, why?
Because pc 3 and pc 4 is in the different vlan,
or in the different broadcast domain.
Let’s continue, here we can see that the
arp packet only forwarded to pc 2.
Pc 2 will answer the arp packet, and then forwarded
to pc 1.
After the arp is complete like this, pc 1 will
send icmp packet,
remember that icmp packet is the ping.
And now successful,
Okay I hope you understand.
For testing again, let’s add one pc again
to vlan 10.
Here let’s add one pc and then connecting
to the switch.
Here we can see that the interface is fa0/5,
by default this interface is in the vlan 1,
let’s check it.
Do show vlan brief.
Here we can see that fa0/5 is in the vlan
1.
Now let’s assign this interface to vlan
10.
Interface fa0/5, switchport mode access and
then switchport access vlan 10.
Let’s show the vlan again, show vlan brief,
okay here we can see that now,
fa0/5 is in the vlan 10.
So now, if pc 1 send arp packet, the arp packet
will be broadcasted to pc 2 and pc 10, why?
Because pc 2 and pc 10 now is in the same vlan
as pc 1, which is vlan 10.
The case is same if we add one more pc, and
then assign the pc to vlan 10,
so the arp packet will also broadcasted to this new pc.
Let’s try it.
Here we can see the interface is fa0/6.
Let’s assign this interface to vlan 10.
So interface fa0/6, switchport mode access,
and switchport access vlan 10.
Let’s verify it, do show vlan brief.
Okay here we can see that fa0/2, fa0/3, fa0/5,
and fa0/6 is in the vlan 10.
Now let’s see the arp packet.
But before that let’s clear the arp table first.
Here we can see some entry in the arp table,
let’s clear it, okay now this is empty.
PC 2, here also have arp table, let’s clear
it, okay now this is empty.
In the switch, here we have some entry in
mac address table, let’s clear it,
and okay now it is empty.
Okay now let’s try to send packet from pc 1
to pc 2, here we can see that pc 1 send a arp
packet to ask the mac address of 192.168.1.2,
which is pc 2.
Continue, the arp packet will be forwarded
to the switch, here we can see that switch
receive arp packet from pc 1, and then will
be broadcasted to fa0/3, fa0/5, and fa0/6.
This is means that the arp packet will be
broadcasted to all pc in the vlan 10.
Continue, here we can see that the arp packet
is broadcasted to pc 2, pc 10, and pc 11.
But pc 10 and pc 11 will not reply it.
The only one will reply this arp packet is
pc 2.
The arp reply will sent to switch, and from
switch will sent to the pc 1.
Next pc 1 will send icmp.
The icmp will be sent to pc 2, the pc 2 will
reply the icmp to pc 1, and this is successful.
Okay I think enough for this video.
I hope you understand about vlan.
Thankyou for watching and see you on the next
video